.\" Sorry for my English 
.\" --Dmitry Yu Okunev <dyokunev@ut.mephi.ru> 0x8E30679C
.\"
.\" Thanks to oldlaptop [https://github.com/oldlaptop] for help with spelling
.\"
.TH CLSYNC 1 "JULY 2013" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
clsync \- live sync tool, written in GNU C
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B clsync [ ... ] -- [ sync\-handler\-arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B clsync
executes
.I sync\-handler
with appropriate arguments on FS events in directory
.I watch\-dir
using the
.BR inotify (7)
Linux kernel subsystem.

Extended regex\-rules to filter what files and
directories to sync may be placed in
.I rules\-file

.SH OPTIONS

This options can be passed as arguments or to be used in the configuration
file.

To disable numeric option set to zero:
.RS
	=0
.RE

To disable string option (for example path to file) set to empty string:
.RS
	=
.RE

Also you can use previously set values while setting new options. Substring
.IR %option_name%
will be substituted with previously set value of option
.IR option_name .
(see 
.BR "CONFIGURATION FILE" )

.I sync\-handler\-arguments
applies only to modes:
.RS
simple, direct, shell, rsyncdirect, rsyncshell
.RE

To set
.I sync\-handler\-arguments
in config file use '--'. An example:
.RS
-- = -aH --exclude-from %EXCLUDE-LIST% --include-from=%INCLUDE-LIST% --exclude '*' %watch-dir%/ %destination-dir%/
.RE
 
.B \-W, \-\-watch\-dir
.I watch\-dir
.RS
Root directory to be monitored by
.BR clsync .

Required.
.PP
.RE

.B \-S, \-\-sync\-handler
.I sync\-handler
.RS
Path to
.I sync\-handler
to be used for syncing by
.BR clsync .
(see 
.IR \-\-mode )

Is required for all modes except "direct" and "rsyncdirect" [see 
.BR "SYNC HANDLER MODES" ]
.PP
.RE

.B \-R, \-\-rules\-file
.I rules\-file
.RS
Path to file with filter rules of objects to be monitored. (see 
.BR RULES )

Is not set by default.
.PP
.RE

.B \-D, \-\-destination\-dir
.I destination\-directory
.RS
Defines directory to sync to for modes "rsyncdirect", "rsyncso" and "so". (see
.IR \-\-mode )

Is not set by default.
.PP
.RE

.B \-M, \-\-mode
.I mode
.RS
Sets syncing mode. Possible values:
.RS
.IR simple 
.RS 
calls
.IR sync\-handler " for every event"
.RE
.IR direct
.RS
calls
.IR sync\-handler " for every sync"
with passing files lists as arguments
.RE
.IR shell
.RS
calls
.IR sync\-handler " for every sync"
with passing files lists in a file
.RE
.IR rsyncdirect
.RS
calls rsync by path
.IR sync\-handler " directly"
.RE
.IR rsyncshell
.RS
calls
.IR sync\-handler " that supposed to run rsync for every sync (recommended
mode)"
.RE
.IR rsyncso
.RS
loads shared object by path
.IR sync\-handler " with "
.BR dlopen "(3) and calls function " clsyncapi_rsync " function for every sync"
.RE
.IR so
.RS
loads shared object by path
.IR sync\-handler " with "
.BR dlopen "(3) and calls function " clsyncapi_sync " function for every sync"
.RE
.RE

See
.B SYNC HANDLER MODES
.PP

Required.
.RE

.B \-b, \-\-background
.RS
Daemonize, forcing clsync to fork() on start.

Is not set by default.
.PP
.RE

.B \-H, \-\-config\-file
.I config\-file\-path
.RS
Use configuration from file
.IR config\-file\-path
(see 
.BR "CONFIGURATION FILE" ).

Set to "/NULL/" if no config files should be read.

Is not set by default.
.PP
.RE

.B \-K, \-\-config\-block
.I config\-block\-name
.RS
Use configuration block with name
.IR config\-block\-name
(see 
.BR "CONFIGURATION FILE" ).

The default value is "default".
.PP
.RE

.B \-\-config\-block\-inherits
.I config\-parent\-block\-name
.RS
Use configuration block with name
.IR config\-parent\-block\-name
as parent for
.IR config\-block\-name
(see 
.BR "CONFIGURATION FILE" ).
Options from
.IR config\-parent\-block\-name
will be inherited to
.IR config\-block\-name .

The default value is "default".
.PP
.RE

.B \-\-custom\-signals
.I custom\-signals
.RS
Set a list of signals and corresponding config block names. The config block
will be use on catching the corresponding signal.

Format is
.RS
.I signal:config\-block\-name[,signal:config\-block\-name[,...]]
.RE

For example:
.RS
\-\-custom\-signals=29:debug,28:normal
.RE
In this line signals "28" and "29" will be added to the sighandler.
And clsync will use options from config block "debug" on signal 29 and
"normal" on signal 28.

To reset all custom signals use the 0-th signal (e.g. "\-\-custom\-signals=0").

The default value is "".
.PP
.RE

.B \-z, \-\-pid\-file
.I path\-to\-pidfile
.RS
Writes pid to file by path
.IR path\-to\-pidfile .

Is not set by default.
.PP
.RE

.B \-\-status\-file
.I status\-file\-path
.RS
Write status description into file with path
.IR status\-file\-path .

Possible statuses:
.RS
.IR starting
.RS
initializing subsystems and marking file tree with FS monitor
subsystem
.RE
.IR initsync
.RS
processing initial syncing
.RE
.IR running
.RS
waiting for events or syncing
.RE
.IR "synchandler error"
.RS
waiting between synchandler execution tries (after a failure) [is used only
while 
.BR \-\-threading =off]
.RE
.IR rehashing
.RS
reloading configuration files
.RE
.IR "thread gc"
.RS
running threads' garbage collector
.RE
.IR preexit
.RS
executing the
.I \-\-pre\-exit\-hook
.RE
.IR terminating
.RS
running the last iteration (if required) and preparing to die
.RE
.IR exiting
.RS
executing the
.I \-\-exit\-hook
and cleaning up [for
.BR valgrind (1)]
.RE
.RE

Is not set by default.
.PP
.RE

.B \-u, \-\-uid
.I uid
.RS
Drop user privileges to uid
.I uid
with
.BR setuid (2)

If there's a
.BR capabilities (7)
support then the default value is "nobody" (or "65534" if "nobody" not found), otherwise the option is not set by default;
.PP
.RE

.B \-g, \-\-gid
.I gid
.RS
Drop group privileges to gid
.I gid
with
.BR setgid (2)

If there's a
.BR capabilities (7)
support then the default value is "group" (or "65534" if "nogroup" not found), otherwise the option is not set by default;
.PP
.RE

.B \-\-sync\-handler\-uid
.I sync\-handler\-uid
.RS
An user ID to be used for
.IR sync\-handler .

See
.BR \-\-preserve\-capabilities .

The default value is "$UID".
.PP
.RE

.B \-\-sync\-handler\-gid
.I sync\-handler\-gid
.RS
A group ID to be used for
.IR sync\-handler .

See
.BR \-\-preserve\-capabilities .

The default value is "$GID".
.PP
.RE


.B \-C, \-\-preserve\-capabilities
.I capabilities\-list
.RS
.B [Linux only, requires capabilities]

Use
.BR capset (2)
and
.BR prctl (2)
to preserve "CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH", "CAP_SETUID" or/and "CAP_SETGID" [see 
.BR capabilities (7)]
Linux capability for thread using
.BR fts "(3), " inotify "(7) and " execve "(2)."
This allows to preserve enough FS privileges to watch a file tree and execute
the
.I sync\-handler
with required uid and gid [see 
.B \-\-sync\-handler\-uid
and
.BR \-\-sync\-handler\-gid ]
after dropping privileges via
.BR setuid "(2) and " setgid "(2)"
[see
.B \-\-uid
and
.BR \-\-gid ]

Possible values:
.RS
.B CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH
.RS
To bypass FS read checks (for
.BR fts " and " inotify ).
.RE
.B CAP_SETUID
.RS
To be able to use
.BR setuid (2)
before
.BR execve (2)
on the
.BR sync\-handler .
.RE
.B CAP_SETGID
.RS
To be able to use
.BR setgid (2)
before
.BR execve (2)
on the
.BR sync\-handler .
.RE
.B CAP_KILL
.RS
To be able to kill setuid()-ed processes
.RE
.br

.br
Any combinations of this values are also supported. The list may be presented
as a comma separated values, like:
.RS
CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH,CAP_SETUID,CAP_SETGID
.RE
.RE

The default value is "CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH,CAP_SETUID,CAP_SETGID,CAP_KILL" if the
.B clsync
runner have such privileges.
.PP
.RE

.B \-\-inherit\-capabilities
.RS
.B [Linux only, requires capabilities]

Sets a mode for capabilities inheriting.

Possible values:
.RS
.B permitted
.RS
Inherits all permitted capabilities
.RE
.B dont-touch
.RS
Don't change inheritable capabilities set
.RE
.B clsync
.RS
Use
.BR clsync 's
effective capabilities set
.RE
.B empty
.RS
Reset all capabilities
.RE
.RE

The default value is "empty".
.RE

.B \-\-thread\-splitting
.RS
.B [Linux only, requires capabilities]

Split the main thread to privileged and non-privileged. This's an additional
way to secure your system from any bug in
.B clsync
while running it with capabilities or root privileges. But
.B clsync
will utilize in few times more CPU resources. So it's a performance vs
security trade off.

If you're using this option and running the
.I sync\-handler
with the root user then it's highly recommended to enable
.BR \-\-check\-execvp\-arguments ,
too. Otherwise in case of
.B clsync
security bug a hacker will be able to use execvp() with any arguments
with root privileges.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.B \-\-check\-execvp\-arguments
.RS
.B [Requires \-\-thread\-splitting]

Enables execvp() arguments recheck in the privileged thread (in case of their
substitution to any exploit-given arguments).

This option doesn't utilize a lot of CPU resources but forbids run-time
changing of
.I sync\-handler\-arguments
and hook file paths.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.B \-\-chroot
.I chroot\-directory
.RS
clsync chroot()\-s [see
.BR chroot (2)]
to directory
.I chroot\-directory
before any syncing processes.

This option may be used in conjunction with
.I \-\-uid
and
.I \-\-gid
for security reasons.

Remeber! If you're chroot()\-ing somewhere, the
.I sync\-handler
will be limited by the chroot\-environment, too. If you're using rsync then
you may want to "mount \-\-bind" some directories to the
.IR chroot\-directory .

Is not set by default.
.PP
.RE

.B \-\-mountpoints
.I [mountpoint[,mountpoint[,mountpoint]]]
.RS
.B [Linux only]

Umount (with MNT_DETACH) everything except listed mountpoints.

Supposed to be use for security reasons.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.B \-r, \-\-retries
.I "number-of-tries"
.RS
Tries limit to sync with
.IR sync-handler .

.B clsync
will die after
.I number-of-tries
tries.

To try infinite set "0".

Delay between tries is equal to
.I \-\-delay\-sync
value.

The default value is "1".
.RE

.B \-\-ignore\-failures
.RS
Don't die on sync failures.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.B \-p, \-\-threading
.I threading-mode
.RS
Use
.BR pthreads (7)
to parallelize syncing processes. For example if
.B clsync
(with
.BR  \-\-threading=off )
is already syncing a huge file then all other syncs will be suspended
until the huge file syncing finish. To prevent this suspends you can use
"safe" or "full" threading mode.

Possbile values:
.RS
.IR off
.RS
disable threading for syncing processes.
.RE
.IR safe 
.RS
parallelize syncs but suspend syncings of object that are already
syncing in another process (until the process finish).
.RE
.IR full 
.RS
parallelize syncs without suspendings.
.RE
.RE

Characteristics:
.RS
.IR off
.RS
New modifications won't be synced until old ones finish.
.RE
.IR safe 
.RS
Theoretically is the best way. But may utilize of lot of CPU if
there's a lot of simultaneous parallel syncs. (also this way is not well
tested)
.RE
.IR full
.RS
May cause multiple simultaneous syncing of the same file, which
in turn can cause bug inside
.IR sync\-handler " (see below)."
.RE

.RE

If you're running
.B clsync
with option
.B \-\-threading=full
in conjunction with
.B rsync
with option
.BR \-\-backup ,
you may catch a bug due to nonatomicity of rsync's file replace operation.
(see
.BR DIAGNOSTICS )

The default value is "off".
.RE

.B \-Y, \-\-output
.I log\-destination
.RS
Sets destination for log writing (errors, warnings, infos and debugging).

Possible values:
.RS
.I stderr
.br
.I stdout
.br
.I syslog
.RE

The default value is "stderr".
.RE

.B \-\-one\-file\-system
.RS
Don't follow to different devices' mount points. This option just adds option
"FTS_XDEV" for
.BR fts_open (3)
function.

.B Warning!
If you're using this option (but no \-\-exclude\-mount\-points)
.B clsync
will write neither includes nor excludes of content of mount points.
.br
This may cause problems e.g. you're using rsync for sync-handler without
similar option "\-\-one\-file\-system".

Is not set by default.
.RE

.B \-X, \-\-exclude\-mount\-points
.RS
Forces
.I \-\-one\-file\-system
but also add excludes to do not sync mount points.

This requires to do
.BR stat (2)
syscalls on every dir and can reduce performance.

Is not set by default.
.RE


.PP
.B \-c, \-\-cluster\-iface
.I interface\-ip
.RS
.B Not implemented, yet.

.B DANGEROUS OPTION. This functionality wasn't tested well. You can lost your data.

Enables inter-node notifing subsystem to prevent sync looping between nodes.
This's very useful features that provides ability of birectional sync of the
same directory between two or more nodes.
.I interface-ip
is an IP-address already assigned to the interface that will be used for
multicast notifing.

Not enabled by default.

To find out the IP-address on interface "eth0", you can use for example next
command:

ip a s eth0 | awk '{if($1=="inet") {gsub("/.*", "", $2); print $2}}'

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-m, \-\-cluster\-ip
.I multicast\-ip
.RS
.B Not implemented yet.

Sets IP-address for multicast group.

This option can be used only in conjunction with
.BR \-\-cluster\-interface .

Use IP-addresses from 224.0.0.0/4 for this option.

The default value is "227.108.115.121". [(128+"c")."l"."s"."y"]
.RE

.PP
.B \-P, \-\-cluster\-port
.I multicast\-port
.RS
.B Not implemented yet.

Sets UDP-port number for multicast messages.

This option can be used only in conjunction with
.BR \-\-cluster\-interface .

.I multicast\-port
should be greater than 0 and less than 65535.

The default value is "40079". [("n" << 8) + "c"]
.RE

.PP
.B \-W, \-\-cluster\-timeout
.I cluster\-timeout
.RS
.B Not implemented yet.

Sets timeout (in milliseconds) of waiting answer from another nodes of the
cluster. If there's no answer from some node, it will be excluded.

The default value is "1000". [1 second]
.RE

.PP
.B \-n, \-\-cluster\-node\-name
.I cluster\-node\-name
.RS
.B Not implemented yet.

Sets the name of current node in the cluster. It will be used in action
scripts of another nodes (see 
.BR "SYNC HANDLER MODES" ).

The default value is $(uname \-n).
.RE

.PP
.B \-o, \-\-cluster\-hash\-dl\-min
.I hash\-dirlevel\-min
.RS
Sets minimal directory level for ctime hashing (see
.BR CLUSTERING ).

The default value is "1".
.RE

.PP
.B \-O, \-\-cluster\-hash\-dl\-max
.I hash\-dirlevel\-max
.RS
.B Not implemented yet.

Sets maximal directory level for ctime hashing (see
.BR CLUSTERING ).

The default value is "16".
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-cluster\-scan\-dl\-max
.I scan\-dirlevel\-max
.RS
.B Not implemented yet.

Sets maximal directory level for ctime scanning (see
.BR CLUSTERING ).

The default value is "32".
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-standby\-file
.I standby\-file\-path
.RS
Sets file to path that should be checked before every sync. If file exists the
sync will be suspended until the file is deleted. It may be useful if you need
freeze destination directory while running some scripts.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-max\-iterations
.I iterations\-count
.RS
Sets synchronization iterations limit. One iteration means one sync-handler
execution.

.I iterations\-count
.RS
set to 0 means no limit (infinite loop).

set to 1 means that only initial sync will be done

set to n means that only initial sync and (n-1) sync-ups after that will be done
.RE

Hint: This option may be useful in conjunction with \-\-exit\-on\-no\-events
to prevent infinite sync-up processes.

The default value is "0".
.RE

.PP
.B \-k, \-\-timeout\-sync
.I sync-timeout
.RS
Sets timeout for syncing processes.
.B clsync
will die if syncing process alive more than
.I sync-timeout
seconds.

Set "0" to disable the timeout.

The default value is "86400" ["24 hours"].
.RE

.PP
.B \-w, \-\-delay\-sync
.I additional\-delay
.RS
Sets the minimal delay (in seconds) between syncs.

The default value is "30".
.RE

.PP
.B \-t, \-\-delay\-collect
.I ordinary\-delay
.RS
Sets the delay (in seconds) to collect events about ordinary files and
directories.

The default value is "30".
.RE

.PP
.B \-T, \-\-delay\-collect\-bigfile
.I bigfiles\-delay
.RS
Sets the delay (in seconds) to collect events about "big files" (see
.IR \-\-threshold\-bigfile ).

The default value is "1800".
.RE

.PP
.B \-B, \-\-threshold\-bigfile
.I filesize\-threshold
.RS
Sets file size threshold (in bytes) that separates ordinary files from
"big files". Events about "big files" are processed in another queue with a
separate collecting delay. This is supposed to be used as a means of unloading
IO resources.

The default value is "134217728" ["128 MiB"].
.RE

.PP
.B \-L, \-\-lists\-dir
.I tmpdir\-path
.RS
Sets directory path to output temporary events\-lists files.

See
.BR "SYNC HANDLER MODES" .

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-have\-recursive\-sync
.RS
Use action "recursivesync" instead of "synclist" for directories that were just marked (see
.B "SYNC HANDLER MODES"
case
.BR shell ).

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-synclist\-simplify
.RS
Removes the first 3 parameters in list files of action "synclist" (see
.B "SYNC HANDLER MODES"
case
.BR shell ).

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-A, \-\-auto\-add\-rules\-w
.RS
Forces clsync to create a "w\-rule" for every non-"w-rule" (see
.BR RULES ).

Not recommended to use in modes "rsyncdirect", "rsyncshell" and "rsyncso"

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-rsync\-inclimit
.I rsync\-includes\-line\-limit
.RS
Sets soft limit for lines count in files by path
.IR rsync\-listpath .
Unfortunately, rsync works very slowly with huge "\-\-include\-from"
files. So,
.B clsync
splits that list with approximately
.I rsync\-includes\-line\-limit
lines per list if it's too big, and executes by one rsync instance per list
part. Use value "0" to disable the limit.

The default value is "20000".
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-rsync\-prefer\-include
.RS
Forces
.B clsync
to prefer a "lot of includes" method instead of a "excludes+includes" for
rsync on recursive syncing.

See cases
.BR rsyncshell ,
.B rsyncdirect
and
.B rsyncso
of
.BR "SYNC HANDLER MODES" .

This option is not recommended.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-x, \-\-ignore\-exitcode
.I exitcode
.RS
Forces
.B clsync
to do not process exitcode
.I exitcode
of
.I sync\-handler
as an error. You can set multiple ignores by passing this option multiple
times.

Recommended values for rsync case is "24". You can set multiple values with
listing a lot of "\-x" options (e.g. "\-x 23 \-x 24") or via commas
(e.g. "\-x 23,24"). To drop the list use zero exitcode (e.g. "\-x 0"). For
example you can use "\-x 0,23" to drop the list and set "23"-th exitcode to
be ignored.

Is not set by default (or equally is set to "0").
.RE

.PP
.B \-U, \-\-dont\-unlink\-lists
.RS
Do not delete list\-files after
.I sync\-handler
has finished.

This may be used for debugging purposes.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-F, \-\-full\-initialsync
.RS
Ignore filter rules from
.I rules-file
on initial sync.

This may be useful for quick start or e.g. if it's required to sync 
"/var/log/" tree but not sync every change from there.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-only\-initialsync
.RS
Exit after initial syncing on clsync start.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-exit\-on\-no\-events
.RS
Exit if there's no events. Works like
.IR \-\-only\-initialsync ,
but also syncs events collected while the initial syncing.

Unlike
.I \-\-only\-initialsync
this option uses FS monitor subsystem to monitor for new events while the initial syncing. This may reduce performance. On the other hand this way may be used to be sure, that everything is synced at the moment before clsync will exit.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-skip\-initialsync
.RS
Skip initial syncing on clsync start.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-exit\-hook
.I path\-of\-exit\-hook\-program
.RS
Sets path of program to be executed on clsync exit.

If this parameter is set then clsync will exec on exit:
.RS
.I path\-of\-exit\-hook\-program label 
.RE

The execution will be skipped if initial sync wasn't complete.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-pre\-exit\-hook
.I path\-of\-pre\-exit\-hook\-program
.RS
Sets path of program to be executed before the last sync iteration (see
.IR "\-\-max\-iterations" ", " "\-\-exit\-on\-no\-events" " and "
.BR SIGNALS ")."

If this parameter is set then clsync will exec on exit:
.RS
.I path\-of\-pre\-exit\-hook\-program label
.RE

The execution will be skipped if initial sync wasn't complete.

If
.B clsync
finishes due to
.I \-\-exit\-on\-no\-events
and
.I \-\-pre\-exit\-hook
is set then the pre\-exit hook will be executed and additional sync iteration
will be triggered.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
.RS
This option is supposed to increase verbosity. But at the moment there's no
"verbose output" in the code, so the option does nothing. :)

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-d, \-\-debug
.RS
Increases debugging output. This may be supplied multiple times for more
debugging information, up to a maximum of five "d" flags (more will do 
nothing), for example "\-d \-d \-d \-d \-d" or "\-d5" (equivalent cases)

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-dump\-dir
.RS
Directory to write clsync's instance information by signal 29 (see 
.BR SIGNALS ")."
The directory shouldn't exists before dumping.

Is set to "/tmp/clsync-dump-%label%" by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
.RS
Suppresses error messages.

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-\-monitor
.I monitor\-subsystem
.RS
Switches FS monitor subsystem.

Possible values:
.RS
.IR inotify 
.RS
.BR inotify "(7) [Linux, (FreeBSD via libinotify)]"

Native, fast, reliable and well tested Linux FS monitor subsystem.

There's no performance profit to use "inotify" instead of "kevent" on FreeBSD
using "libinotify". It backends to "kevent" anyway. However inotify support is
well tested and recommended.

.RE
.IR kqueue
.RS
.BR kqueue "(2) [FreeBSD, (Linux via libkqueue)]"

A *BSD kernel event notification mechanism (inc. timer, sockets, files etc).

This monitor subsystem that cannot determine file creation event, but it can
determine a directory where something happened. So
.B clsync
is have to rescan whole dir every time on any content change.

Also this API requires to open every monitored file and directory. So it may
produce a huge amount of file descriptors. Be sure that
.I kern.maxfiles
is big enough (in FreeBSD).

CPU/HDD expensive way.

.B Not well tested. Use with caution!

FreeBSD users: notify me about found bugs or performance issues, please. And
before the bugfix you can switch to "inotify" through libinotify or to "bsm".
.RE
.IR bsm
.RS
.BR bsm "(3) [FreeBSD]"

Basic Security Module (BSM) Audit API.

This is not a FS monitor subsystem, actually. It's just an API to access to 
audit information (inc. logs).
.B clsync
can setup audit to watch FS events and report it into log. After that
.B clsync
will just parse the log via
.BR auditpipe "(4) [FreeBSD]."

Reliable, but hacky way. It requires global audit reconfiguration that
may hopple audit analysis.

.B Not well tested. Use with caution!
Also file /etc/security/audit_control will be overwritten with:
.RS
#clsync
.br
 
.br
dir:/var/audit
.br
flags:fc,fd,fw,fm,cl
.br
minfree:0
.br
naflags:fc,fd,fw,fm,cl
.br
policy:cnt
.br
filesz:1M
.RE
.RE
.RE

The default value is "inotify". If "inotify" is not supported then the default
value is "kqueue".
.RE

.PP
.B \-l, \-\-label
.I label
.RS
Sets a label for this instance of clsync. The
.I label
will be passed to
.I sync\-handler
every execution.

The default value is "nolabel".
.RE

.PP
.B \-h, \-\-help
.RS
Outputs options list and exits with exitcode "0".

Is not set by default.
.RE

.PP
.B \-V, \-\-version
.RS
Outputs clsync version and exits with exitcode "0".

Is not set by default.
.RE

.SH SYNC HANDLER MODES
.B clsync
executes
.I sync\-handler
that supposed to take care of the actual syncing process. Therefore
.B clsync
is only a convenient way to run a syncing script.

.B clsync
can run
.I sync\-handler
in seven ways. Which way will be used depends on specified mode (see
.IR \-\-mode )

.I sync\-handler\-arguments
are used only in modes:
.RS
simple
.br
direct
.br
shell
.br
rsyncdirect
.br
rsyncshell
.RE

If
.I sync\-handler\-arguments
are not set then the default setting is used (see below).

case
.B simple
.RS
Executes for every syncing file/dir:
.RS
.I sync\-handler sync\-handler\-arguments
.RE

Default
.I sync\-handler\-arguments
are:
.RS
sync
.I %label% %EVENT\-MASK% %INCLUDE\-LIST%
.RE

In this case,
.I sync\-handler
is supposed to non\-recursively sync file or directory by path
.IR %INCLUDE\-LIST% .
With
.I %EVENT\-MASK%
it's passed bitmask of events with the file or directory (see 
"/usr/include/linux/inotify.h").

Additional substitutions:
.RS
.B %EVENT\-MASK%
.RS
Is replaced by integer of events IDs.
.RE
.B %INCLUDE\-LIST%
.RS
Is replaced by the file/dir to be synced
.RE
.RE

Not recommended. Not well tested.
.RE

case
.B direct
.RS
Executes for every sync:
.RS
.I sync\-handler sync\-handler\-arguments
.RE

.I sync\-handler
is supposed to be a path to
.BR cp "-like"
utility.

Default
.I sync\-handler\-arguments
are:
.RS
%INCLUDE\-LIST% %destination-dir%/
.RE

Additional substitutions:
.RS
.B %INCLUDE\-LIST%
.RS
Is replaced by the list of files/dirs to be synced 
.RE
.RE

Recommended case.
.RE

case
.B shell
.RS
Executes for every sync (if 
.B recursivesync
is not used instead):
.RS
.I sync\-handler sync\-handler\-arguments
.RE

Default
.I sync\-handler\-arguments
are:
.RS
synclist %label% %INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%
.RE

Default
.I sync\-handler\-arguments
for initial sync if
.I \-\-have\-recursive\-sync
is set are:
.RS
initialsync %label% %INCLUDE\-LIST%
.RE

In this case,
.I sync\-handler
is supposed to non\-recursively sync files and directories from list in a file
by path %INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH% on "synclist". 

Also
.I sync\-handler
is supposed to recursively sync data from directory by path
%INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH% with manual excluding extra files on "initialsync".

Additional substitutions:
.RS
.B %TYPE%
.RS
Is replaced by "sync"/"initialsync".
.RE
.B %INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%
.RS
Is replaced by the path of the include list file
.RE
.B %INCLUDE\-LIST%
.RS
Is replaced by the list of files/dirs to be synced 
.RE
.RE

Not recommended. Not well tested.
.RE

case
.B rsyncdirect
.RS
Executes for every sync:
.RS
.I sync\-handler sync\-handler\-arguments
.RE

.I sync\-handler
is supposed to be a path to
.B rsync
binary.

Default
.I sync\-handler\-arguments
are:
.RS
\-aH \-\-delete \-\-exclude\-from %EXCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH% \-\-include\-from
%INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH% --exclude='*' %watch-dir%/ %destination-dir%/
.RE
if option
.I \-\-rsync-\-prefer\-include
is not set and
.RS
\-aH \-\-delete \-\-include\-from %INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH% --exclude='*'
%watch-dir%/ %destination-dir%/
.RE
if the option is set

Error code "24" from
.I sync\-handler
will be ignored in this case. We also recommend to ignore exitcode "23".

Additional substitutions:
.RS
.B %INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%
.RS
Is replaced by the path of the include list file
.RE
.B %EXCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%
.RS
Is replaced by the path of the exclude list file
.RE
.B %RSYNC\-ARGS%
.RS
Is replaced by default
.IR sync\-handler\-arguments ", but"
without "%watch-dir%/ %destination-dir%/"
.RE
.RE

Recommended case.
.RE

case
.B rsyncshell
.RS
Executes for every sync:
.RS
.I sync\-handler sync\-handler\-arguments
.RE

Default
.I sync\-handler\-arguments
are:
.RS
rsynclist %label% %INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH% [%EXCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%]
.RE

In this case,
.I sync\-handler
is supposed to run "rsync" application with parameters: 

\-aH \-\-delete\-before \-\-include\-from
.I %INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%
\-\-exclude '*'

if option
.I \-\-rsync\-prefer\-include
is enabled.

And with parameters:

\-aH \-\-delete\-before \-\-exclude\-from
.I %EXCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%
\-\-include\-from
.I %INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%
\-\-exclude '*'

if option
.I \-\-rsync\-prefer\-include
is disabled.

Additional substitutions:
.RS
.B %INCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%
.RS
Is replaced by the path of the rsync include list file
.RE
.B %EXCLUDE\-LIST\-PATH%
.RS
Is replaced by the path of the rsync exclude list file
.RE
.RE

Recommended case.
.RE

case
.B rsyncso
.RS
In this case there's no direct exec*() calling. In this case
.B clsync
loads
.I sync-handler
as a shared library with
.BR dlopen (3)
and calls function "int clsyncapi_rsync(const char *inclist, const char *exclist)" from it
for every sync.
.br
.B inclist
is a path to file with rules for "\-\-include\-from" option of rsync. This argument is always not NULL.
.br
.B exclist
is a path to file with rules for "\-\-exclude\-from" option of rsync. This argument is NULL if
.B \-\-rsync\-prefer\-include
is set.
.br
.I "Excludes takes precedence over includes."

Also may be defined functions "int clsyncapi_init(ctx_t *, indexes_t *)"
and "int clsyncapi_deinit()" to initialize and deinitialize the syncing
process by this shared object.

To fork the process should be used function
"pid_t clsyncapi_fork(ctx_t *)" instead of "pid_t fork()" to make clsync
be able to kill the child.

See example file "clsync-synchandler-rsyncso.c".

Recommended case.
.RE

case
.B so
.RS
In this case there's no direct exec*() calling. In this case
.B clsync
loads
.I sync-handler
as a shared library with
.BR dlopen (3)
and calls function "int clsyncapi_sync(int n, api_eventinfo_t *ei)" from it
for every sync.
.B n
is number of elements of
.BR ei .
.B ei
is an array of structures with information about what and how to sync (see
below).

api_eventinfo_t is a structure:
.RS
struct api_eventinfo {
.br
        uint32_t         evmask;		// event bitmask for file/dir
by path
.BR path .
.br
        uint32_t         flags;		// flags of "how to sync" the file/dir
.br
        size_t           path_len;		// strlen(path)
.br
        const char      *path;		// the
.B path
to file/dir need to be synced
.br
        eventobjtype_t   objtype_old;	// type of object by path
.B path
before the event.
.br
        eventobjtype_t   objtype_new;	// type of object by path
.B path
after the event.
.br
};
.br
typedef struct api_eventinfo api_eventinfo_t;
.RE

The event bitmask (evmask) values can be learned from
"/usr/include/linux/inotify.h".

There may be next flags' values (flags):
.RS
enum eventinfo_flags {
.br
        EVIF_NONE        = 0x00000000,	// No modifier
.br
        EVIF_RECURSIVELY = 0x00000001	// sync the file/dir recursively
.br
};
.RE
.br
Flag "EVIF_RECURSIVELY" may be used if option
.I \-\-have\-recursive\-sync
is set.

Is that a file or directory by path
.B path
can be determined with
.B objtype_old
and
.BR objtype_new .
.br
.B objtype_old
reports about which type was the object by the path before the event.
.br
.B objtype_new
reports about which type became the object by the path after the event.

.B objtype_old
and
.BR objtype_new
have type
.BR eventobjtype_t .

.RS
enum eventobjtype {
.br
        EOT_UNKNOWN     = 0,	// Unknown
.br
        EOT_DOESNTEXIST = 1,	// Doesn't exist (not created yet or already deleted)
.br
        EOT_FILE        = 2,	// File
.br
        EOT_DIR         = 3,	// Directory
.br
}
typedef enum eventobjtype eventobjtype_t;
.RE

Also may be defined functions "int clsyncapi_init(options_t *, indexes_t *)"
and "int clsyncapi_deinit()" to initialize and deinitialize the syncing
process by this shared object.

To fork the process should be used function
"pid_t clsyncapi_fork(options_t *)" instead of "pid_t fork()" to make clsync
be able to kill the child.

See example file "clsync-synchandler-so.c".

Recommended case.
.RE
.RE

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

Output variables - variables that are set by clsync before calling
.IR sync-handler .

.B "Output variables"
.RS
CLSYNC_STATUS - 
.BR clsync 's
status (see possible statuses in description of
.IR \-\-status\-file )
.RE

.RS
CLSYNC_ITERATION - count of done synchronizaton iterations after initial sync
see \-\-max\-iterations option
.RE

.SH RULES
Filter riles can be placed into
.I rules\-file
with one rule per line.

Rule format:
.I [+\-][fdw*]regexp

.I +
\- means include;
.I \-
\- means exclude;
.I f
\- means file;
.I d
\- means directory;
.I w
\- means walking to directory;
.I *
\- means all.

For example: \-*^/[Tt]est

It's not recommended to use
.I w
rules in modes "rsyncdirect", "rsyncshell" and "rsyncso".
.BR rsync (1)
allows one to set syncing and walking only together in "\-\-include" rules
("\-\-files\-from" is not appropriate due to problem with syncing files
deletions). So there may be problems with clsync's
.I w
rules in this cases.

More examples:

Syncing pwdb files and sshd_config (non-rsync case):
.RS
	+f^/passwd$
.br
	+f^/group$
.br
	+f^/shadow$
.br
	+f^/ssh/sshd_config$
.br
	+w^$
.br
	+w^/ssh$
.br
	\-*
.RE

Syncing pwdb files and sshd_config (non-rsync case with option
.IR \-\-auto\-add\-rules\-w ):
.RS
	+f^/passwd$
.br
	+f^/group$
.br
	+f^/shadow$
.br
	+f^/ssh/sshd_config$
.br
	-*
.RE

Syncing pwdb files and sshd_config (rsync case):
.RS
	+f^/passwd$
.br
	+f^/group$
.br
	+f^/shadow$
.br
	+f^/ssh/sshd_config$
.br
	+d^$
.br
	+d^/ssh$
.br
	-*
.RE

Syncing /srv/lxc tree (rsync case):
.RS
	\-d/sess(ion)?s?$
.br
	\-f/tmp/
.br
	+*
.RE

.SH SIGNALS
1  \- (HUP) rereads filter rules

2  \- (INT) exits without waiting of syncing processes ("hard kill",
kills children)

3  \- (QUIT) waits for current syncing processes and exit ("soft kill", waits
for children)

10 \- runs threads' GC function

12 \- runs full resync

15 \- (TERM) exits without waiting of syncing processes ("hard kill",
kills children)

16 \- interrupts sleep()/select() and wait() [for debugging and internal uses]

29 \- dump information to
.IR dump-dir
[for debugging]

If you need to kill clsync but leave children then you can use 9-th (KILL)
signal.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS

Initial rsync process works very slow on clsync start
.RS
Probably there's too huge exclude list is passed to rsync. This can happened
if you're excluding with regex in clsync's rules a lot of thousands files.
They will be passed to rsync's exclude list one by one.

To diagnose it, you can use "\-U" option and look into 
.I rsync\-exclude\-listpath
file (see
.B "SYNC HANDLER"
case 
.BR d )

To prevent this, it's recommended to write such rules for rsync directly 
(not via clsync).

For example, often problem is with PHP's session files. You shouldn't exclude
them in clsync's rules with "\-f/sess_.*", but you should exclude it in rsync
directly (e.g with «\-\-exclude "sess_*"»).
.RE

The following diagnostics may be issued on stderr:

Error: Cannot inotify_add_watch() on [...]: No space left on device (errno:
28)
.RS
Not enough inotify watching descriptors is allowed. It can be fixed
by increasing value of "sysctl fs.inotify.max_user_watches"
.RE

Error: Got non-zero exitcode
.I exitcode
[...]
.RS
.I sync\-handler
returned non-zero exitcode. Probably, you should process exitcodes in it or
your syncer process didn't worked well. I case of using rsync, you can find
the exitcodes meanings in
.BR "man 1 rsync" .

If
.I exitcode
equals to 23 and you're using
.B clsync
in conjunction with
.BR rsync ,
this may happend, for example in next cases:

.RS

\- Not enough space on destination.

\- You're running clsync with 
.B \-\-threading=full
and rsync with
.BR \-\-backup .
See a bugreport by URL:
.IR https://bugzilla.samba.org/show_bug.cgi?id=10081 .

.RE

To confirm the problem, you can try to add "return 0" or "exit 0" into
your
.IR sync\-handler .

.RE

To get support see
.BR SUPPORT .

.SH CONFIGURATION FILE

.B clsync
supports configuration file.

By default
.B clsync
tries to read next files (in specified order):
.RS
~/.clsync.conf
.br
/etc/clsync/clsync.conf
.RE

This may be overrided with option
.IR \-\-config\-file .

.B clsync
reads only one configuration file. In other words, if option
.I \-\-config\-file
is not set and file
.B ~/.clsync.conf
is accessible and parsable,
.B clsync
will not try to open
.BR /etc/clsync/clsync.conf .
Command line options have precedence over config file options.

Configuration file is parsed with glib's g_key_file_* API. That means,
that config should consits from groups (blocks) of key-value lines as in the
example:
.RS
[default]
.br
background = 1
.br
mode = rsyncshell
.br
debug = 0
.br
output = syslog
.br
label = default
.br
pid\-file = /var/run/clsync\-%label%.pid


[debug]
.br
config\-block\-inherits = default
.br
debug = 5
.br
background = 0
.br
output = stderr


[test]
.br
mode=rsyncdirect
.br
debug=3
.RE

Also glib's
.B gkf
API doesn't support multiple assignments. If you need to list some values
(e.g. exitcodes) just list them with commas in single assignment
(e.g. "ignore\-exitcode=23,24").

In this example there're 3 blocks are set - "default", "debug" and "test".
And block "debug" inherited setup of block "default" except options "debug",
"background" and "output".

By default
.B clsync
uses block with name "default". Block name can be set by option
.IR \-\-config\-block .

.SH CLUSTERING

Not implemented yet.
.B Don't try to use cluster functionality.

Not described yet.

.SH EXAMPLES
Working examples you can try out in "/usr/share/doc/clsync/examples/"
directory. Copy this directory somewhere (e.g. into "/tmp"). And try to run
"clsync-start-rsync.sh" in there. Any files/directories modifications in
"testdir/from" will be synced to "testdir/to" with few seconds delay.
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
Dmitry Yu Okunev <dyokunev@ut.mephi.ru> 0x8E30679C
.SH SUPPORT
You can get support on official IRC-channel in Freenode "#clsync" or on
github's issue tracking system of repository
"https://github.com/xaionaro/clsync".

Don't be afraid to ask about clsync configuration, ;). 
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR rsync (1),
.BR pthreads (7),
.BR inotify (7)
.BR kqueue (2)

